Ingestion Volume Reduction guide (#13534)
DataDog/documentation: content/en/tracing/guide/trace_ingestion_volume_control.md

Then, because trace data is very repetitive, you should have enough trace samples to investigate any issues. For high throughput services, there's usually no need for you to collect every single request - an important enough problem should always show symptoms in multiple traces. Datadog puts the control in your hands, allowing you to have the visibility that you need to solve problems while remaining within budget.

## How to assess the current state of your services' ingestion configuration ?

To assess the current state of applications’ instrumentation, leverage the [Trace Ingestion Control page][1] that provides detailed information on agent and tracing library configuration.

### How to tell if you are within your monthly ingestion allocation?

Use the ingestion monthly usage KPI to get an estimation of your usage compared to the monthly allocation of 150 GB of ingested spans per APM host (summed across all APM hosts).

> {{< img src="/tracing/guide/trace_ingestion_volume_control/ingestion_overage.png" alt="Ingestion Overage KPI" style="width:40%;" >}}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
{{< img src="/tracing/guide/trace_ingestion_volume_control/ingestion_overage.png" alt="Ingestion Overage KPI displaying 170 percent estimated monthly usage of 23.3 monthly available TB across all infrastructure" style="width:40%;" >}}
```

### How to further investigate your APM usage ?

The ingestion configuration can be investigated for each service. Click on a service row to see the Service Ingestion Summary, which surfaces:

> - `Breakdown by ingestion reason`: which ingestion mechanism is responsible for the ingestion volume

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Ingestion reason breakdowns**: which [ingestion mechanism][2] is responsible for the ingestion volume
```

> - `Upstream service sampling decision makers`: which upstream services are taking sampling decisions for the spans ingested in regards to the [default ingestion mechanism][3]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Top sampling decision makers** (in bytes or spans): which upstream services are taking sampling decisions for the spans ingested in regards to the [default ingestion mechanism][3]
```

An [out-of-the-box dashboard][4] is also available to get more insights on historical trends related to your ingestion usage and volume. Clone this dashboard to be able to edit widgets and perform further analysis.

> ## How to reduce your ingestion volume ?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Reduce your ingestion volume
```

> ### 1. Identify services responsible for most of the ingestion volume

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Identify services responsible for most of the ingestion volume
```

> To identify which services are responsible for most of the ingestion volume, sort the table by `Downstream Bytes/s`. This column allows you to spot which services take most of the sampling decisions, which also impact downstream services.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To identify which services are responsible for most of the ingestion volume, sort the table by **Downstream Bytes/s**. This column allows you to spot which services take most of the sampling decisions, which also impact downstream services.

```

> If the service is starting the span, `Downstream Bytes/s` will also encompass the volume of spans coming from downstream services for which the service took the sampling decision.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If the service is starting the span, **Downstream Bytes/s** also encompasses the volume of spans coming from downstream services for which the service took the sampling decision.
```

> By configuring sampling rates for a few high-throughput services, most of the “exceeding” ingestion volume will be lowered.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
By configuring sampling rates for a few high-throughput services, most of the “exceeding” ingestion volume can be lowered.
```

> ### 2. Identify which ingestion mechanisms are responsible for most of the ingestion volume

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Identify which ingestion mechanisms are responsible for most of the ingestion volume
```

> The `Traffic Breakdown` column gives a good indication of the service's sampling configuration.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The **Traffic Breakdown** column gives a good indication of the service's sampling configuration.
```

> If the service has a high Downstream Bytes/s rate and a high sampling rate (blue section of the traffic breakdown column), reducing the sampling rate for this service is expected to have a high impact on the ingestion volume.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If the service has a high Downstream Bytes/s rate and a high sampling rate (displayed as the filled section of the traffic breakdown column), reducing the sampling rate for this service is expected to have a high impact on the ingestion volume.
```

> {{< img src="/tracing/guide/trace_ingestion_volume_control/sampling_99_percent.png" alt="APM no ingestion sampling" style="width:70%;" >}}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
{{< img src="/tracing/guide/trace_ingestion_volume_control/sampling_99_percent.png" alt="APM ingestion sampling displaying 99 percent complete traces ingested, meaning no sampling" style="width:70%;" >}}
```

> To get more details, click on the service and look at the `Ingestion Reasons Breakdown` in the side panel, which gives an overview of the share of ingestion volume attributed to each mechanism.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To get more details, click on the service and look at the **Ingestion reasons breakdown** in the side panel, which gives an overview of the share of ingestion volume attributed to each mechanism.
```

> The default mechanism to sample traces is `head-based sampling`. The decision whether to sample a trace or not is taken at the beginning of its lifecycle, and propagated downstream in the context of the requests in order to ensure that you can always view and analyse complete traces. Read more about the [default sampling mechanism][3].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The default mechanism to sample traces is _head-based sampling_. The decision whether to sample a trace or not is taken at the beginning of its lifecycle, and propagated downstream in the context of the requests in order to ensure that you can always view and analyze complete traces. Read more about the [default sampling mechanism][3].
```

> Some additional ingestion reasons, surfaced in the ingestion control page, and as a tag of `datadog.estimated_usage.apm.ingested_bytes` metric may be responsible for your ingestion volume

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Some additional ingestion reasons, surfaced in the ingestion control page, and as a tag of `datadog.estimated_usage.apm.ingested_bytes` metric may be responsible for your ingestion volume.

```

- `auto`: agent distributed rates to libraries

> - `rule`: libraries sampling percentage for specific services

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `rule`: libraries' sampling percentage for specific services
```

> - `manual`: in-code decision override to keep/drop a span and its children.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `manual`: in-code decision override to keep/drop a span and its children
```

- `analytics`: deprecated ingestion mechanism that samples single spans without the full trace

> - `error`: Sampling of errors uncaught by the head-based sampling

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `error`: sampling of errors uncaught by the head-based sampling
```

> - `rare`: Sampling of rare traces (catching all combinations of a set span tags)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `rare`: sampling of rare traces (catching all combinations of a set span tags)
```

> Additionally, other products can be responsible for sampled span volume

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Additionally, other products can be responsible for sampled span volume:

```

> - `synthetics` & `synthetics-browser`: API and browser tests are connected to the trace generated by the test

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `synthetics` & `synthetics-browser`: API and browser tests are connected to the trace generated by the test.
```

- `rum`: Requests from web and mobile applications are linked to the corresponding backend traces.

> - `lambda` & `xray`: Traces generated from AWS lambda functions instrumented with X-Rray or datadog libraries.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `lambda` & `xray`: Traces generated from AWS lambda functions instrumented with `xray` or Datadog libraries.
```

> ### 3. Configure the ingestion sampling rate at the library level

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Configure the ingestion sampling rate at the library level
```

> If the main reason for most of the ingestion volume is `auto` or `rule`, the volume can be configured by setting a sampling rule at the tracing library level.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If the main reason for most of the ingestion volume is `auto` or `rule`, the volume can be configured by setting a sampling rule at the tracing library level.

```

> Click on the `Manage Ingestion Rate` CTA to configure a sampling rate for the service. Select the service language and the ingestion sampling rate you wish to apply.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Click the **Manage Ingestion Rate** button to configure a sampling rate for the service. Select the service language and the ingestion sampling rate you want to apply.
```

> **Note:** The application needs to be redeployed in order to apply the configuration changes. The changes can also be applied by setting [environment variables][5] (recommended)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Note:** The application needs to be redeployed in order to apply the configuration changes. Datadog recommends applying the changes by setting [environment variables][5].
```

---
title: Ingestion volume control with APM Distributed Tracing
kind: guide
further_reading:
- link: "/tracing/trace_ingestion/ingestion_controls/"
  tag: "Documentation"
  text: "Ingestion Control Page"
---

## Overview

The [Ingestion control page][1] provides granular visibility over the ingestion configuration for all services, in the agent and in the tracing libraries. All [Ingestion Mechanisms][2] are publicly documented and configurable.

With the page, you have full visibility and control your span volume. Consequently, you are be able to:
- Ingest the data that is most relevant to your business and your observability goals.
- Reduce network costs by avoiding sending unused trace data to the Datadog platform.
- Control and manage your overall costs

> ## What happens if I decide to reduce my ingested trace volume?

Author: ```suggestion
## What happens if you decide to reduce your ingested trace volume?
```

Sampling does not mean less value out of Datadog APM

{{< img src="/tracing/guide/trace_ingestion_volume_control/sampling_25_percent.png" alt="APM ingestion sampling" style="width:70%;" >}}

> Even by reducing the ingestion volume for certain services, the **request, error, and latency metrics** (RED metrics) will remain 100% accurate as they are being calculated based on 100% of the applications’ traffic, regardless of any sampling configuration (i.e. this is done by a different system). These metrics are included when purchasing Datadog APM. In order to make sure you have full visibility into your application’s traffic, you can use these metrics to spot potential errors on a service or a resource, by creating monitors and SLOs.

Author: ```suggestion
Even by reducing the ingestion volume for certain services, the **request, error, and latency metrics** (RED metrics) remain 100% accurate, as they are being calculated based on 100% of the applications’ traffic, regardless of any sampling configuration. These metrics are included when purchasing Datadog APM. In order to make sure you have full visibility into your application’s traffic, you can use these metrics to spot potential errors on a service or a resource, by creating monitors and SLOs.
```

> Then, because trace data is very repetitive, you will have enough trace samples to investigate any issues. For high throughput services, there should not be any need for you to collect every single request - an important enough problem will always show symptoms in multiple traces. Datadog puts the control in your hands, allowing you to have the visibility that you need to solve problems while remaining within budget.

Author: ```suggestion
Then, because trace data is very repetitive, you should have enough trace samples to investigate any issues. For high throughput services, there should not be any need for you to collect every single request - an important enough problem should always show symptoms in multiple traces. Datadog puts the control in your hands, allowing you to have the visibility that you need to solve problems while remaining within budget.
```

> ## How to assess the current state of my services' ingestion configuration ?

Author: ```suggestion
## How to assess the current state of your services' ingestion configuration ?
```

To assess the current state of applications’ instrumentation, leverage the [Trace Ingestion Control page][1] that provides observability over agent and tracing library configuration.

> ### How can I tell if I’m within my monthly ingestion allocation?

Author: ```suggestion
### How to tell if you are within your monthly ingestion allocation?
```

Use the ingestion monthly usage KPI to get an estimation of the magnitude of overage compared to the monthly allocation of 150 GB of ingested spans per APM host (summed across all APM hosts).

{{< img src="/tracing/guide/trace_ingestion_volume_control/ingestion_overage.png" alt="Ingestion Overage KPI" style="width:40%;" >}}

> ### How to further investigate my APM usage ?

Author: ```suggestion
### How to further investigate your APM usage ?
```

The ingestion configuration can be investigated for each service. Click on a service row to see the Service Ingestion Summary, which surfaces:
- `Breakdown by ingestion reason`: which ingestion mechanism is responsible for the ingestion volume
- `Upstream service sampling decision makers`: which upstream services are taking sampling decisions for the spans ingested in regards to the [default ingestion mechanism][3]

An [out-of-the-box dashboard][4] is also available to get more insights on historical trends around the ingestion usage and volume. Clone this dashboard to be able to edit widgets and perform further analysis.

> ## How do I reduce my ingestion volume ?

Author: ```suggestion
## How to reduce your ingestion volume ?
```

If the service is starting the span, `Downstream Bytes/s` will also encompasses the volume from downstream services for which the service took the sampling decision.

By configuring sampling rates for a few top services, most of the “exceeding” ingestion volume will already be lowered.

### 2. Identify which ingestion mechanisms are responsible for most of the ingestion volume

The `Traffic Breakdown` column should give a good indication of the sampling configuration of the service.

If the service has a high Downstream Bytes/s rate and a high sampling rate (blue section of the traffic breakdown column), reducing the sampling rate for this service should have a high impact on the ingestion volume.

{{< img src="/tracing/guide/trace_ingestion_volume_control/sampling_99_percent.png" alt="APM no ingestion sampling" style="width:70%;" >}}

To get more details, click on the service and look at the `Ingestion Reasons Breakdown` in the side panel. This gives an overview of the share of ingestion volume attributed to each mechanism.

> The main mechanism to sample traces is `head-based sampling`. The decision is taken at the beginning of the trace, and propagated downstream in the context of the requests in order to make sure we keep complete traces. Read more about the [default sampling mechanism][3].

Author: ```suggestion
The main mechanism to sample traces is `head-based sampling`. The decision is taken at the beginning of the trace, and propagated downstream in the context of the requests in order to make sure to keep complete traces. Read more about the [default sampling mechanism][3].
```

Some additional ingestion reasons, surfaced in the ingestion control page, and as a tag of `datadog.estimated_usage.apm.ingested_bytes` metric may be responsible for your volume
- `auto`: agent distributed rates to libraries
- `rule`: libraries sampling percentage for specific services
- `manual`: in-code decision override to keep/drop a span and its children.
- `analytics`: deprecated ingestion mechanism that samples single spans without the full trace

> - `error`: Sampling of errors uncatched by the head-based sampling

Author: ```suggestion
- `error`: Sampling of errors uncaught by the head-based sampling
```

- `rum`: Requests from web and mobile applications are linked to the corresponding backend traces.
- `lambda` & `xray`: Traces generated from lambdas instrumented with Xray of datadog libraries.

To understand which ingestion reason has the most impact, use the out-of-the-box dashboard [APM Ingestion reason analysis][5] that provides a breakdown of which of these ingestion reasons has the most impact over your ingestion volume

### 3. Configure the ingestion sampling rate at the library level

If the main reason for most of the ingestion volume is `auto` or `rule`, the volume can be configured by setting a rule at the tracing library level.
Click on the `Manage Ingestion Rate` CTA to configure a sampling rate for the service. Select the service language, the ingestion sampling rate to apply and copy the code snippet to apply.

**Note:** The application needs to be redeployed in order to apply the configuration changes. The changes can also be applied by setting [environment variables][6]

## Further Reading

{{< partial name="whats-next/whats-next.html" >}}

[1]: /tracing/trace_ingestion/ingestion_controls

> [2]: /tracing/trace_ingestion/ingestion_mechanisms

Author: ```suggestion
[2]: /tracing/trace_ingestion/mechanisms
```

[3]: /tracing/trace_ingestion/mechanisms/#head-based-default-mechanism
[4]: /tracing/trace_retention/usage_metrics/

> [5]: https://app.datadoghq.com/

Author: This link will be updated once we have the proper dashboard released
